Collective Agency — intervention budget review, 2026-09-08

Scope: a closed-form geometric check of option 6A. No oscillator trajectories,
estimators, benchmark implementation, or tests of H1–H5 were run. Existing exact
parity and information-distribution controls are already complete and unchanged.

Finding
The candidate calls for matching sum |delta theta_i| but does not freeze whether
angles are endpoint distances on the circle or unwrapped travel. For shortest
endpoint distances, each oscillator can move by at most pi. Consider 16 phases,
eight at +pi/4 and eight at -pi/4. Their mean phase is zero and r=sqrt(2)/2,
so this is not an undefined-mean corner case. At lambda=0.5, every component moves
pi/8 and the macro intervention costs 2*pi. A single oscillator cannot match that
budget. Contracting any half with the same lambda costs pi, only half the macro
budget. The latter arm needs an explicit rescaling rule too.

Counting an unwrapped 2*pi kick instead makes a full turn cost nonzero while
leaving the endpoint unchanged. Such a path or actuator-effort budget is possible,
but it is a different intervention definition and must be explicitly justified.

Reproduce from the repository root:
  python lab/benchmarks/collective-agency/intervention_budget_check.py
  pytest tests/test_collective_intervention_budget.py -q

intervention-budget-result.json records the numerical certificate and the SHA-256
of the unchanged candidate. The tests also check rotation/full-turn invariance
and reject a zero-coherence mean instead of choosing an arbitrary direction.

Concrete amendment for independent review, NOT adopted in the candidate
Use shortest endpoint angular distance and a shared total budget capped below
pi (for example pi/2). Scale each arm to that budget, including the macro arm;
this replaces the fixed lambda=0.5 by a state-dependent strength. A random-half
arm whose contraction support cannot spend that budget needs a preregistered
eligibility or alternate-direction rule. The distribution of excluded states
would have to be reported. Alternatively, drop the one-oscillator control and
justify another matched allocation. These alternatives must not be selected
after observing intervention outcomes.

Exact blocker
A reviewed freeze must choose the angle/budget convention and the matching and
ineligible-state rules, in addition to resolving the six already recorded PI
questions, outcome horizon and recovery epsilon. This check resolves none of
those decisions by fiat. freeze-candidate.json and both false authorization flags
are preserved byte-for-byte. No benchmark implementation has been started.
